JEFF: Just 10 minutes from
Canada's busiest highway sits
this serene lake, which holds
the secrets of human history.
It's an incredible site.
Tim Patterson and his team of
geologists have spent years
studying Crawford Lake,
created 13,000 years ago
by a collapsed cave.
The little lake is incredibly
deep, reaching down 24 m.
The bottom is so well-protected
that it's become like
a time capsule, absorbing
thousands of years of history.
(Drill whirring)
When the geologists retrieved
samples of sediment
from the lake floor,
they found its layers were like
the rings of a tree, each line
offering clues to its age.
These layers, for example,
formed during a terrible
drought in 1935.
But by around 1950,
the chemistry of the lake
began to change...
...when essentially there was
enormous economic development
as the world recovered
from World War II.
Radioactive plutonium was found
in the mud, thought to be from
nuclear weapons tests
thousands of kilometres away.
The sediment showed effects
from acid rain and
fossil fuels, and some microbe
species began to disappear.
And now we've changed the
character of the system so much
that we're actually leaving
a geological record of
human activity.
JEFF: Crawford Lake is unique.
No other body of water on Earth
is known to contain this
combination of attributes,
and this little lake has now
caught the world's attention.
The Anthropocene thesis...
This international panel of
scientists announced
Crawford Lake had been chosen
to mark the start of
a new chapter
in Earth's history
known as the Anthropocene,
or the Age of Humans.
Human beings as a species
are becoming
the greatest force of nature.
This renowned Canadian
photographer produced
a documentary on
the Anthropocene,
the world-altering event that
some scientists consider
comparable to the extinction
of the dinosaurs.
And today, we're having a slower
motion extinction event,
but we are now the equivalent
of a meteor impact.
Scientists are still debating
whether Anthropocene should be
considered an official epoch,
and samples from Crawford Lake
will be used as evidence.
It is the first step towards
the potential ratification
of Anthropocene
as a geological epoch.
And Crawford Lake
also offers hope.
In recent decades,
as the world reduced
nuclear weapons testing,
acid rain,
and coal power production,
something incredible happened.
The lake began to heal.
Jeff Semple, Global News,
Milton, Ontario.